---
layout: post
title: The Year of Perl 6 (Really, This Time)
---

With the recent Christmas release of [Perl
6](https://perl6advent.wordpress.com/2015/12/25/christmas-is-here/), and the
start of another new year, I decided to go back and take a quick look at the
language that I had been hearing about for so long.

First though, I need to give a short background of myself and Perl. I first
learned Perl5 around four years ago at an old job, and I've always had a soft
spot for all things perly since then. I found it to be very interesting and
versatile at the time. Looking back at it though, many of the things about Perl
that originally fascinated me (natural language, context, etc.) still do, but
I'm not so sure they are something that I actually believe helps me to better
write or understand code. I'm definitely no expert when it comes to Perl 5 or 6,
but there are a few things I'd like to write about.

### The Basics

Just to cover it real quick, Perl6 adds a lot of the features you would expect
to find in any modern object oriented language. Things like classes or roles
(think composition). Perl5 had these, but you usually had to make use of a
library to really get anything done (so long
[Moose](https://metacpan.org/pod/Moose), [Moo](https://metacpan.org/pod/Moo), or
whatever you preferred). It also includes something called Grammars, which are
like a class for Regular Expressions. They make it easy to reuse your regexes,
and do things like construct an AST from parsed input. Perl always led the way
with regexes, and it's really cool to see the language doing it again.

It's kinda funny, I remember first reading about these changes, and not really
liking them. Differences like moving from `->` to `.` for method invocation
looked like they would make Perl feel like every other imperative language. Of
course I know it is really silly and impractical to feel that way. Besides, from
what i've seen, Perl6 is still that ASCII factory explosion that everyone
loves/hates.

Now for more specific language features that I thought were kinda neato:

### Lamdas (and whatever-star)

Over time, I've found myself starting to really appreciate functional
programming. Previously, it had always been a thing that I learned about in
school but mostly kept in the back of my head. I was trying to get things done
in the real world, which usually meant a lot of imperative, state changing code.
However, now I see the value, and have been trying to integrate it more now in
what I write. So naturally, I really liked how Perl6 accommodates that style.

Perl6 uses `->` to create a lamda, and can be used in many of the places that you could also pass a block.

```perl6
# Basic iteration
for @things -> $thing {
  do-the-thing($thing);

  maybe-another-thing;
}

# Event driven example
$thing.on('my-event', -> $result {
 say $result;
});

# super perly way of declaring positional parameters in the block instead
my &say-two-things = { say $^a ~ $^b }; # same as -> $a, $b { say $a ... }

&say-two-things('foo', 'bar') # prints 'foobar'
```

You can also create anonymous functions with the `sub` keyword (without passing
a name), but I think the aforementioned syntax is much cleaner. Of course, since
were talking about Perl, there is an even shorter-hand, using the `*` operator
(I've seen called the whatever-star). When perl sees `*`, it will attempt to
interpret the expression as a lamda instead. Here are a few examples:

```perl6
my &add-two = * + 2;
&add-two(2); # 4

# Oh Perl, you never change
my &mult = * * *;

&mult(4, 2) # 8

# Genuninely useful. Gets you an array of names:
my @people = [
  {
    name => 'mike',
    title => 'person'
  },
  ...
];

map *<name>, @people; # (mike, ...)
```

Functions are first class citizens, and in Perl6 there is greater emphasis on
immutablity, so writing functional Perl is easier than ever.

### Gradual Typing

I think I generally gravitate more towards dynamic typing because in other
languages (\*cough\*Java), I felt like I was doing a lot of needless work to
satisfy the constraints of the type system. It seemed like the programming
equivalent of filling out paperwork at the doctor's office or something.
However, theres no doubt its a huge boon to maintainability, and even more so on
larger projects. So for those reasons, I really like Perl6's gradual typing. You
can add those constraints when you feel they are needed:

```perl6
class Animal {
  # Notice the whatever-star at the end. Perl will both check that
  # the value is an Int, and also that the expression in the where clause
  # returns true for it.
  subset NonZeroInt of Int where * > 0;

  has Str $.name;
  has Int $.position = 0;

  method run(NonZeroInt $distance) {
    $!position += $distance;
  }

  method growl(NonZeroInt $times) {
    say "rawr" x $times;
  }

  method description returns Str {
    "it's a $.name";
  }
}
```

The great thing is that at the least, with Perl6's type system, you can get rid
of the boiler plate your subs used to contain at the top. Things like making
sure you got a string as a parameter, making sure it's of a non-zero length, or
whatever else. On the other hand, if you are only writing a small script to
automate some task for yourself, you can ignore it all and just focus on getting
that done. If you find that it would actually be useful to other people and want
to distribute it, Awesome! Maybe then add some extra type checks to your code to
make it more robust.

### Misc.

This really is the tip of the proverbial iceberg of what Perl6 has to offer, so
I' going to slow down from here. However, before I'm done, I have a few more
miscellaneous thoughts.

#### Operators

Perl6 sure does seem to like it's operators, man. And it looks very easy to
define your own as well. I'm not sure that's something you really should ever
do, but it's nice to know that you can. It really helps to remove some of the
magic of the language knowing that they are no more complicated than a regular
`sub` with some defined associativity tacked on:

```perl6
# You can do it
sub infix:<@!>(Str $a, Str $b) { $a ~ 'bar' ~ $b }

# But should you?
'foo' @! 'baz' # foobarbaz
```

#### That Mascot

Perl6 has a mascot (you can google it), and I really wish they would either
redesign it, or just drop it all together. After all, a language doesn't even
need to have a logo or a mascot. If you are going to bother, at least give it a
better treatment than the ol' _5 minutes of MS paint_ job. Plus, it's a lot
harder to convince your boss to let you use Perl6 for your next project when
that logo is the first thing they see after a search.

### The Next Year

I really hope with this finalization of the language spec that Perl6 starts to
gain some more traction. It really is a pretty cool language and maybe it will
finally live up to its 15 year hype train.
